Add documentation for OSB query randomization (#8990)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _benchmark/user-guide/optimizing-benchmarks/randomizing-queries.md

nav_order: 160
parent: Optimizing benchmarks
grand_parent: User guide
---

# Randomizing queries

By default, OpenSearch Benchmark runs identical queries for some number of iterations. But this isn't suitable for all tests. For example, when testing caching behavior, running many iterations of the same query would cause 1 miss and many hits, which doesn't approximate real usage very well.

OSB lets you randomize queries in a configurable way.

## Overview

Randomization works by changing the values in an operation's query. For example in this nyc_taxis operation:

```
{
    "name": "range",
    "operation-type": "search",
    "body": {
    "query": {
        "range": {
        "total_amount": {
            "gte": 5,
            "lte": 15
        }
        }
    }
    }
}
```

We can change the values for `"gte"` and `"lt"` to get distinct queries, which become different entries in the request cache.

To get cache hits, we can't completely randomize this; we have to reuse the same values some of the time. To achieve this we generate some number `N` of value pairs for each randomized operation at the beginning of the benchmark. Each pair gets an index from 1 to `N`. 

> Every time a query is sent to OpenSearch, some fraction `rf` (short for "repeat-frequency") of the time, we draw a pair from this saved list. This pair may have been seen before, so it could cause a cache hit. For example, if `rf` = 0.7, the cache hit ratio could be up to 70%. In practice, this may or may not be a hit, depending on benchmark duration and cache size. 

Reviewer: By `pair` do we mean "value pairs"?

For example, to randomize the `"total_amount"` field in the `"range"` operation from earlier, a standard value source might look like: 

```
def random_money_values(max_value):
    gte_cents = random.randrange(0, max_value*100)
    lte_cents = random.randrange(gte_cents, max_value*100)
    return {
        "gte":gte_cents/100,
        "lte":lte_cents/100
    }

def range_query_standard_value_source():
    return random_money_values(120.00)
```

And the registration looks like: 

```
def register(registry):
    registry.register_standard_value_source("range", "total_amount", range_query_standard_value_source)
```

There may already be code in this function. Leave it there if so. If `workload.py` does not exist or lacks a `register(registry)` function, you can create them. 

> #### Randomizing non-range queries

Reviewer: @peteralfonsi: Does this section only pertain to modifying `workload.py`?

Author: Yes. To randomize non-range queries you have to do this additional step, which is only within `workload.py`. No additional flags or anything are required.

By default, OSB assumes the query to be randomized is a `"range"` query with values `"gte"`/`"gt"`, `"lte"`/`"lt"`, and optionally `"format"`. If this isn't the case you can configure it to use a different query type name and different values. 

For example to randomize the operation: 

```
{
  "name": "bbox", 
  "operation-type": "search", 
  "index": "nyc_taxis",
  "body": { 
    "size": 0,
    "query": {
      "geo_bounding_box": {
        "pickup_location": {
          "top_left": [-74.27, 40.92],
          "bottom_right": [-73.68, 40.49]
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

You would register the following in `workload.py`: 

```
registry.register_query_randomization_info("bbox", "geo_bounding_box", [["top_left"], ["bottom_right"]], [])
```

The first argument, `"bbox"`, is the operation name. The second argument, `"geo_bounding_box"`, is the query type name.

> The third argument is a list of lists: `[["top_left"], ["bottom_right"]]`. Each entry in the outer list represents one parameter name that will be randomized. It's a list because we may have multiple different versions of the same name that represent roughly the same thing. For example, `"gte"` or `"gt"`. In this case there's only one option for each parameter name. At least one version of each parameter name must be present in the original query for it to be randomized.

Author: We should have 4 arguments - `"bbox"`, `"geo_bounding_box"`, `[["top_left"], ["bottom_right"]]`, and `[]`. May have missed the description of the second argument `"geo_bounding_box"` as it's in the same paragraph as the description of the first argument?

---
layout: default
title: Running randomized workloads
nav_order: 160
parent: Optimizing benchmarks
grand_parent: User guide
---

# Randomizing queries

By default, OpenSearch Benchmark runs identical queries for multiple benchmark iterations. However, running the same queries repeatedly isn’t ideal for every test. For example, simulating real-world caching with many iterations of the same query isn’t accurate, as it results in one cache miss followed by numerous hits. OpenSearch Benchmark lets you randomize queries in a configurable way. 

> ## Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

```json
{
    "name": "range",
    "operation-type": "search",
    "body": {
    "query": {
        "range": {
        "total_amount": {
            "gte": 5,
            "lte": 15
        }
        }
    }
    }
}
```

> You can't completely randomize the values because the cache would not get any hits. To get cache hits, the cache must sometimes see the same values. To account for the same values while randomizing, OpenSearch Benchmark generates a number `N` of value pairs for each randomized operation at the beginning of the benchmark. OpenSearch Benchmark stores these values in a saved list where each pair gets an index from `1` to `N`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can't completely randomize the values because the cache would not get any hits. To get cache hits, the cache must sometimes encounter the same values. To account for the same values while randomizing, OpenSearch Benchmark generates a number `N` of value pairs for each randomized operation at the beginning of the benchmark. OpenSearch Benchmark stores these values in a saved list where each pair is assigned an index from `1` to `N`.
```

Every time OpenSearch sends a query, OpenSearch Benchmark decides whether to use a pair of values from this saved list in the query. It does this a configurable fraction of the time, called _repeat frequency_ (`rf`). If OpenSearch has encountered the value pair before, this might cause a cache hit. For example, if `rf` = 0.7, the cache hit ratio could be up to 70%. This ratio could cause a hit, depending on the benchmark's duration and cache size. 

> Saved value pairs are based on the `Zipf` distribution, which empirically matches usage traces for many real caches. For example, if the benchmark draws pair `i` with a probability proportional to `1 / i^alpha`, `alpha` is another parameter controlling the spread of the distribution. Pairs with low indexes appear with a much higher frequency than those with high indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Saved value pairs are based on the `Zipf` distribution, which empirically matches term usage for many real caches. For example, if the benchmark draws pair `i` with a probability proportional to `1 / i^alpha`, `alpha` would represent another parameter controlling the spread of the distribution. Pairs with low indexes appear with a much higher frequency than those with high indexes.
```

> OpenSearch Benchmark selects saved value pairs using the Zipf probability distribution, where the probability of selecting pair `i` is proportional to `1/i^α`. In this formula, i represents the index of the saved value pair, and α controls how concentrated the distribution is. This distribution reflects usage patterns observed in real caches. Pairs with lower i values (closer to `1`) are selected more frequently, while pairs with higher `i` values (closer to `N`) are selected less often.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenSearch Benchmark selects saved value pairs using the Zipf probability distribution, where the probability of selecting pair `i` is proportional to `1/i^α`. In this formula, `i` represents the index of the saved value pair, and `α` controls how concentrated the distribution is. This distribution reflects usage patterns observed in real caches. Pairs with lower `i` values (closer to `1`) are selected more frequently, while pairs with higher `i` values (closer to `N`) are selected less often.
```

Saved value pairs are based on the `Zipf` distribution, which empirically matches usage traces for many real caches. Pair `i` is drawn with probability proportional to `1 / i^alpha`, where `alpha` is another parameter controlling how spread out the distribution is. Pairs with low indexes appear with a much higher frequency than those with high indexes.

Otherwise, the other `1-rf` fraction of the time, we generate a totally new random pair of values. Because the value pairs have not been seen before, it should miss the cache.

## Usage

To use this feature on a workload you must make some changes to your workload's `workload.py` and supply some CLI flags when running OSB.

### Modifying `workload.py`

> Specify how to generate the saved value pairs for each operation by registering a “standard value source” for that operation. This Python function accepts no arguments and returns a dictionary. The keys mirror those in the input query, but are randomized.  Finally, change the `register()` method to register this function with the operation name and field name, which is randomized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specify how to generate the saved value pairs for each operation by registering a “standard value source” for that operation. This Python function accepts no arguments and returns a dictionary. The keys mirror those in the input query, but are randomized. Finally, change the `register()` method to register this function with the operation name and field name, which is randomized.
```

        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

You would register the following function in `workload.py`: 

```py
registry.register_query_randomization_info("bbox", "geo_bounding_box", [["top_left"], ["bottom_right"]], [])
```

The first argument, `"bbox"`, is the operation's name. 

The second argument, `"geo_bounding_box"`, is the query type name.

The third argument is a list of lists: `[[“top_left”], [“bottom_right”]]`. The outer list's entries specify parameters for randomization because there might be different versions of the same name that represent roughly the same parameters, for example, `"gte"` or `"gt"`. Here, there's only one option for each parameter name. At least one version of each parameter's name must be present in the original query in order for it to be randomized.

The last argument is a list of optional parameters. If an optional parameter is present in the random standard value source, OpenSearch Benchmark inserts the parameter into the randomized version of the query. If it's not in the source, it's ignored. There are no optional parameters in the following example, but the typical use case would be `"format"` in a range query.

> If there is no registration, the default registration is used, `registry.register_query_randomization_info(<operation_name>, “range”, [[“gte”, “gt”], [“lte”, “lt”]], [“format”])`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there is no registration, the default registration is used: `registry.register_query_randomization_info(<operation_name>, “range”, [[“gte”, “gt”], [“lte”, “lt”]], [“format”])`.
```

By default, OpenSearch Benchmark runs identical queries for multiple benchmark iterations. However, running the same queries repeatedly isn’t ideal for every test. For example, simulating real-world caching with many iterations of the same query isn’t accurate, as it results in one cache miss, followed by many hits. OpenSearch Benchmark lets you randomize queries in a configurable way. 

For example, changing `"gte"` and `"lt"` in the following `nyc_taxis` operation creates distinct queries, resulting in unique cache entries:

```json
{
    "name": "range",
    "operation-type": "search",
    "body": {
    "query": {
        "range": {
        "total_amount": {
            "gte": 5,
            "lte": 15
        }
        }
    }
    }
}
```

You can’t completely randomize the values, as then the cache would not get any hits. To get cache hits, the cache must sometimes see the same values. To account for the same values while randomizing, OpenSearch Benchmark generates a number `N` of value pairs for each randomized operation at the beginning of the benchmark. OpenSearch Benchmark stores these values in a saved list where each pair gets an index from `1` to `N`.

> 

Reviewer: @natebower: Does the above suggestion work?

Every time OpenSearch sends a query, OpenSearch Benchmark decides whether to use a pair of values from this saved list in the query. It does this a configurable fraction of the time, called repeat frequency (`rf`). If OpenSearch pair has encountered the value pair before, this might cause for a cache hit. For example, if `rf` = 0.7, the cache hit ratio could be up to 70%. This ratio could cause a hit, depending on the benchmark’s duration and cache size. 

Saved value pairs are based on the `Zipf` distribution, which empirically matches usage traces for many real caches. For example, if the benchmark draws pair `i` with a probability proportional to `1 / i^alpha`, `alpha` is another parameter controlling how spread out the distribution is. Pairs with low indexes appear with a much higher frequency than those with high indexes.

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 37: In the second sentence, the second phrase doesn't appear to logically follow the first. Do we mean something like "`alpha` represents a parameter that controls the spread of the distribution"? In the last sentence, what is meant by "low indexes" and "high indexes"? Please clarify.

Reviewer: This is an explanation of the [`Zipf` law of distribution](https://www.w3schools.com/python/numpy/numpy_random_zipf.asp). In our case, `i^alpha` would represent the `nth` common term. The sentence, as written, assumes previous knowledge of the `Zipf` law, however, @peteralfonsi, should we go a little deeper on this explanation?

Reviewer: Also, @peteralfonsi, by "high indexes" and "low indexes", do we mean the order appear in the saved list relative to their terms?

Reviewer: @natebower: Suggestion updated with additional details from @peteralfonsi. The `$` should appear as an equation in the final published page. I'll verify this before merging.

Reviewer 2: @Naarcha-AWS I edited the first four sentences, but I'm still not following the last one. Is there extra text?

Reviewer: @natebower: How does this sound? 

"Therefore, pairs with numerically lower indexes, or indexes closer to `1` in the saved list, appear with a higher frequency in the cache. Consequently, versus pairs with numerically higher indexes, or indexes closer to `N` on the saved list, appear with a lower frequency."

Reviewer 2: I feel like there's some context missing here that's making the paragraph difficult to parse/comprehend. @kolchfa-aws Would you mind helping out with this one?

Reviewer 3: How about (this needs to be formatted for math though):

OpenSearch Benchmark selects saved value pairs using the Zipf probability distribution, where the probability of selecting pair i is proportional to 1/i^α. In this formula, i represents the index of the saved value pair, and α controls how concentrated the distribution is. This distribution reflects usage patterns observed in real caches. Pairs with lower i values (closer to 1) are selected more frequently, while pairs with higher i values (closer to N) are selected less often.

Reviewer: Works for me if it works for @peteralfonsi.

Reviewer 2: @kolchfa-aws @Naarcha-AWS LGTM. Let's go with this. Thanks!

Reviewer: Wait... I'm not sure `i` represents the numerical index value. I thought that `i` represents the term value.

Reviewer: > Wait... I'm not sure `i` represents the numerical index value. I thought that `i` represents the term value.

Getting clarification on this before adjusting the suggestion. Thanks for your help @kolchfa-aws and @natebower!

If there’s no registration, it uses the default; equivalent to registering `registry.register_query_randomization_info(<operation_name>, “range”, [[“gte”, “gt”], [“lte”, “lt”]], [“format”])`.

The `dict` returned by the standard value source should match the parameter names you are randomizing. For example, the standard value source for the earlier example is:

The `dict` returned by the standard value source should match the parameter names you are randomizing. For example, the standard value source for the earlier example is:

```py
def bounding_box_source(): 
    top_longitude = random.uniform(-74.27, -73.68)
    top_latitude = random.uniform(40.49, 40.92)

    bottom_longitude = random.uniform(top_longitude, -73.68)
    bottom_latitude = random.uniform(40.49, top_latitude)

    return { 
        "top_left":[top_longitude, top_latitude],
        "bottom_right":[bottom_longitude, bottom_latitude]
    }
```

### CLI flags

Use the following CLI flags to customize randomization:

> - `--randomization-enabled` turns randomization on and off. If randomization is not enabled, none of the randomization flags will have an effect.

Reviewer 2: "will have an effect" => "will be applied"?

> - `--randomization-enabled` turns randomization on and off. If randomization is not enabled, none of the randomization flags will have an effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--randomization-enabled` turns randomization on and off. If randomization is not enabled, none of the randomization flags will be applied.
```

> - `--randomization-repeat-frequency` or `-rf` sets the fraction of pairs drawn from the saved value pairs generated at the start of the benchmark. The value should be between `0.0` and `1.0`.  Default is `0.3`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `--randomization-repeat-frequency` or `-rf` sets the fraction of pairs drawn from the saved value pairs generated at the start of the benchmark. The value should be between `0.0` and `1.0`. Default is `0.3`. 
```

- `--randomization-n` sets the number `N` of value pairs generated for each operation. Default is `5000`. 

> - `--randomization-alpha` sets the parameter `alpha` controlling the shape of the `Zipf` distribution. The value should be `>=0`. Lower values spread out the distribution more. Default is `1.0`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `--randomization-alpha` sets the `alpha` parameter, which controls the spread of the `Zipf` distribution. The value should be `>=0`. Lower values increase the spread of the distribution. Default is `1.0`. 
```
